# fMRI analysis <span id="multimodal:data:fMRI" label="multimodal:data:fMRI"></span>

Only the main characteristics of the fMRI analysis are described below;
for a more detailed demonstration of fMRI analysis, read previous
tutorial chapters describing fMRI analyses.

Toggle the modality from EEG to fMRI, and change directory to the fMRI
subdirectory (either in MATLAB, or via the "CD" option in the SPM
"Utils" menu)

## Preprocessing the fMRI data

Press the <span class="smallcaps">Batch</span> button and then:

- Select <span class="smallcaps">Spatial: Realign: Estimate &
  Reslice</span> from the SPM menu, create two sessions, and select the
  390 `fM*.img` EPI images within the corresponding Session1 / Session 2
  subdirectories (you can use the filter `^fM.*`). In the "Resliced
  images" option, choose "Mean Image Only".

- Add a <span class="smallcaps">Spatial: Coreg: Estimate</span> module,
  and select the `smri.img` image in the `sMRI` directory for the
  "Reference Image" and select a "Dependency" for the "Source Image",
  which is the Mean image produced by the previous Realign module. For
  the "Other Images", select a "Dependency" which are the realigned
  images (two sessions) from Realign.

- Add a <span class="smallcaps">Spatial: Segment</span> module, and
  select the `smri.img` image as the "Data".

- Add a <span class="smallcaps">Spatial: Normalise: Write</span> module,
  make a "New: Subject", and for the "Parameter File", select a
  "Dependency" of the "Deformation Field Subj-$>$MNI" (from the prior
  segmentation module). For the "Images to Write", select a "Dependency"
  of the "Coreg: Estimate: Coregistered Images" (which will be all the
  coregistered EPI images) and "Segment: INU corrected" (which will
  be the intensity nonuniformity corrected structural image). Also, change the "Voxel
  sizes" to \[3 3 3\], to save diskspace.

- Add a <span class="smallcaps">Spatial: Smooth</span> module, and for
  "Images to Smooth", select a "Dependency" of "Normalise: Write:
  Normalised Images (Subj 1)".

- Save the batch file (e.g, as `batch_fmri_preproc.mat`, and then press
  the "Run" button.

These steps will take a while, and SPM will output some postscript files
with the movement parameters and the coregistration results (see earlier
chapters for further explanation). The result will be a series of 2 sets
of 390 `swf*.img` files that will be the data for the following
1st-level fMRI timeseries analysis.

## Statistical analysis of fMRI data

First make a new directory for the stats output, e.g, a `Stats`
subdirectory within the fMRI directory.

Press the <span class="smallcaps">batch</span> button and then:

- Select "Stats: fMRI model specification" from the SPM module menu, and
  select the new `Stats` subdirectory as the "Directory".

- Select "Scans" for "Units of design".

- Enter `2` for the "Interscan interval" (i.e, a 2s TR).

- Create a new session from the "Data & Design" menu. For "Scans",
  select all the `swf*.img` files from the `Session1` subdirectory
  (except the mean). Under "Multiple Conditions", click "Select File",
  and select the `trials_ses1.mat` file that is provided with these
  data. (This file just contains the onsets, durations and names of
  every event within each session.). For "Multiple regressors", click
  "Select File", and select the `rp*.txt` file that is also in the
  `Session1` subdirectory (created during realignment).

- Repeat the above steps for the second session.

- Under "Basis Functions", "Canonical HRF" add the "Time and Dispersion"
  derivatives.

- Then add a "Stats: Model estimation" module, and for the "Select
  SPM.mat", choose the "Dependency" of the `SPM.mat` file from the
  previous "fMRI model specification" module.

- Add a "Stats: Contrast Manager" module, and for the "Select SPM.mat",
  choose the "Dependency" of the `SPM.mat` file from the previous "Model
  Estimation module".

- Under "Contrast Sessions", create a new F-contrast with a "Name" like
  `faces vs scrambled (all BFs)` and then enter
  `[eye(3) -eye(3) zeros(3,6)]`. This will produce a 3x12 matrix that
  picks out the three basis functions per condition (each as a separate
  row), summing across the two conditions (with zeros for the movement
  parameter regressors, which are of no interest). Then select
  "Replicate (average over sessions)".

- Under "Contrast Sessions", create a new F-contrast with a "Name" like
  `faces + scrambled vs Baseline (all BFs)` and then enter the
  `[eye(3) eye(3) zeros(3,6)]`. Again, select "Replicate (average over
  sessions)".

- Save the batch file (e.g, as `batch_fmri_stats.mat`, and then press
  the "Run" button.

When this has finished, press <span class="smallcaps">Results</span> and
select the `SPM.mat` file that should have been created in the new
`Stats` directory. The Contrast Manager window will appear, and you can
select the "faces vs scrambled (all BFs)" contrast. Do not mask, keep
the title, threshold at $p<.05$ FWE corrected, use an extent threshold
of 60 voxels, and you should get the MIP and table of values (once you
have pressed "whole brain") like that in Figure
Â <a href="#multimodal:fig:22" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="multimodal:fig:22">1</a>. This shows clusters in
bilateral midfusiform (FFA), right occipital (OFA), right superior
temporal gyrus/sulcus (STS), in addition to posterior cingulate and
anterior medial prefrontal cortex. These clusters show a reliable
difference in the evoked BOLD response to faces compared with scrambled
faces that can be captured within the "signal space" spanned by the
canonical HRF and its temporal and dispersion derivatives. Note that
this F-contrast can include regions that show both increased and
decreased amplitude of the fitted HRF for faces relative to scrambled
faces (though if you plot the "faces vs scrambled" contrast estimates,
you will see that the leftmost bar (canonical HRF) is positive for all
the clusters, suggesting greater neural activity for faces than
scrambled faces (also apparent if you plot the event-related
responses)).

There is some agreement between these fMRI effects and the localisation
of the differential ERP for faces vs scrambled faces in the EEG data
(see earlier section). Note however that the fMRI BOLD response reflects
the integrated neural activity over several seconds, so some of the BOLD
differences could arise from neural differences outside the 0-600ms
epoch localised in the EEG data (there are of course other reasons too
for differences in the two localisations; see, eg, Henson et al, under
revision).

<figure id="multimodal:fig:22">
<div class="center">
<img src="../../../../assets/figures/manual/multimodal/fmri_faces_vs_scrambled.png"
style="width:150mm" />
</div>
<figcaption><em>SPM{F} for faces vs scrambled faces.<span
id="multimodal:fig:22"
label="multimodal:fig:22"></span></em></figcaption>
</figure>

You can also press <span class="smallcaps">Results</span> and select the
"faces + scrambled vs Baseline (all BFs)" contrast. Using the same
threshold of $p<.05$ FWE corrected, you should see a large swathe of
activity over most of the occipital, parietal and motor cortices,
reflecting the general visuomotor requirements of the task (relative to
interstimulus fixation). The more posterior ventral occipital/temporal
BOLD responses are consistent with the MEG localisation of faces (or
scrambled faces) versus baseline, though note that the more anterior
ventral temporal activity in the MEG localisation is not present in the
fMRI data, which suggests (but does not imply) that the MEG localisation
may be erroneous.

These contrasts of fMRI data can now be used as spatial priors to aid
the localisation of EEG and/or MEG data, as in the next section.
