Many of the first proof-of-concept fMRI experiments were block designs
with two conditions. In a block design, each condition is presented
continuously for a period usually longer than 20 seconds. In the
earliest fMRI studies (see Kwong, 1992, and Ogawa 1992), one common
paradigm was to alternate between 60 second blocks of a flickering
visual stimulus, and blocks without stimulation. Analysis was done using
a simple t-test between values of the MR signal collected in the \"on\"
condition versus the \"off\" condition. In addition to comparing \"on\"
versus \"off\" conditions, block designs have been used to look at
differences between more similar conditions as well. (Kanwisher has used
block paradigms where the subject is presented with blocks of pictures
of faces and blocks of pictures of houses to probe high-level features
of the visual system)

These block designs tend to be quite powerful for assessing BOLD signal
magnitude differences between conditions. The length of the blocks of
stimulation allows for the HRF to reach maximal values, while the
inter-stimulus intervals are long enough for the HRF to return
completely to baseline during non-stimulation. The downside of block
designs is that they are not powerful at estimating the shape of the
haemodynamic response (aside from its magnitude).

Block designs are also not as useful with many experimental paradigms
having special requirements. In the DM paradigm for example, subjects
are scanned while they are presented with single words. After scanning,
they are given a list of words composed of words seen earlier mixed with
new words, and instructed to mark them as \"old\" or \"new\". For the
old words, the fMRI trials are analyzed according to whether or not the
subject remembered them during the second part of the experiment. In
this example, blocks of \"remembered\" and \"forgotten\" trials cannot
be reliably constructed, because the event categorization depends on a
parameter outside the control of the experimenter.
