# Write Normalised  
Normally, Shoot generates deformations that align with the average shaped template. This routine includes the option to incorporate an affine registration of the template (the final one generated by Shoot), with the TPM data released with SPM.   
"Smoothed" (blurred) spatially normalised images are generated in such a way that the original signal is preserved as well as possible. Note that trilinear interpolation is used, and no masking is done.  It is therefore essential that any fMRI/PET time series are realigned and resliced before they are spatially normalised.  Alternatively, contrast images generated from unsmoothed native space fMRI/PET data can be spatially normalised for a 2nd level analysis.   
Two "preserve" options are provided.  One of them should do the equivalent of generating smoothed "modulated" spatially normalised images.  The other does the equivalent of smoothing the modulated normalised fMRI/PET, and dividing by the smoothed Jacobian determinants.   

* **Shoot Template** (select files)  
Select the final Template file generated by Shoot. This will be affine registered with a TPM file, such that the resulting spatially normalised images are closer aligned to MNI space. Leave empty if you do not wish to incorporate a transform to MNI space (ie just click **done** on the file selector, without selecting any images).   

* **Select according to** (choose an option)  
You may wish to spatially normalise only a few subjects, but have many scans per subject (eg for fMRI), or you may have lots of subjects, but with a small and fixed number of scans for each of them (eg for VBM).  The idea is to chose the way of selecting files that is easier.   

    * **Few Subjects** (create a list of items)  
    Select this option if there are only a few subjects, each with many or a variable number of scans each. You will then need to specify a series of subjects, and the velocity field and images of each of them.   

        * **Subject**   
        Subject to be spatially normalised.   

            * **Deformation field** (select files)  
            Select the deformation field for this subject.   

            * **Images** (select files)  
            Images for this subject to spatially normalise.   

    * **Many Subjects**   
    Select this option if you have many subjects to spatially normalise, but there are a small and fixed number of scans for each subject.   

        * **Deformation fields** (select files)  
        Select the deformation fields for each subject.   

        * **Images** (create a list of items)  
        The velocity field deformations can be applied to multiple images. At this point, you are choosing how many images each velocity field should be applied to.   

            * **Images** (select files)  
            Select images to be warped. Note that there should be the same number of images as there are velocity fields, such that each velocity field warps one image.   

* **Voxel sizes** (enter text)  
Specify the voxel sizes for the warped images. Non-finite values will default to the voxel sizes of the template image that was originally used to estimate the deformation.   

* **Bounding box** (enter text)  
Specify the bounding box for the warped images. Non-finite values will default to the bounding box of the template image that was originally used to estimate the deformation.   

* **Preserve** (choose from the menu)  
    * **Preserve concentrations**: Smoothed spatially normalised images (sw*) represent weighted averages of the signal under the smoothing kernel, approximately preserving the intensities of the original images. This option is currently suggested for eg fMRI.   
    * **Preserve amount**: Smoothed and spatially normalised images preserve the total amount of signal from each region in the images (smw*). Areas that are expanded during warping are correspondingly reduced in intensity. This option is suggested for VBM.   

* **Gaussian FWHM** (enter text)  
Specify the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the isotropic Gaussian blurring kernel in mm.   
