# Create Warped  
This allows spatially normalised images to be generated. Note that voxel sizes and bounding boxes can not be adjusted, and that there may be strange effects due to the boundary conditions used by the warping. Also note that the warped images are not in Talairach or MNI space. The coordinate system is that of the average shape and size of the subjects to which Dartel was applied. In order to have MNI-space normalised images, then the Deformations Utility can be used to compose the individual Dartel warps, with a deformation field that matches (e.g.) the Template grey matter generated by Dartel, with one of the grey matter volumes released with SPM.

* **Flow fields** (select files)  
The flow fields store the deformation information. The same fields can be used for both forward or backward deformations (or even, in principle, half way or exaggerated deformations).

* **Images** (create a list of items)  
The flow field deformations can be applied to multiple images. At this point, you are choosing how many images each flow field should be applied to.

    * **Images** (select files)  
    Select images to be warped. Note that there should be the same number of images as there are flow fields, such that each flow field warps one image.

* **Modulation** (choose from the menu)  
This allows the spatially normalised images to be rescaled by the Jacobian determinants of the deformations. Note that the rescaling is only approximate for deformations generated using smaller numbers of time steps.

* **Time Steps** (choose from the menu)  
The number of time points used for solving the partial differential equations.  Note that Jacobian determinants are not very accurate for very small numbers of time steps (less than about 16).

* **Interpolation** (choose from the menu)  
The method by which the images are sampled when being written in a different space. (Note that Inf or NaN values are treated as zero, rather than as missing data)
    Nearest Neighbour:
      - Fastest, but not normally recommended.
    Trilinear Interpolation:
      - OK for PET, realigned fMRI, or segmentations
    B-spline Interpolation:
      - Better quality (but slower) interpolation, especially with higher degree splines. Can produce values outside the original range (e.g. small negative values from an originally all positive image).
