# Normalise to MNI Space  
Normally, Dartel generates warped images that align with the average-shaped template. This routine includes an initial affine regisration of the template (the final one generated by Dartel), with the TPM data released with SPM.
Smoothed (blurred) spatially normalised images are generated in such a way that the original signal is preserved. Normalised images are generated by a "pushing" rather than a "pulling" (the usual) procedure. Note that a procedure related to trilinear interpolation is used, and no masking is done.  It is therefore recommended that the images are realigned and resliced before they are spatially normalised, in order to benefit from motion correction using higher order interpolation.  Alternatively, contrast images generated from unsmoothed native-space fMRI/PET data can be spatially normalised for a 2nd level analysis.
Two "preserve" options are provided.  One of them should do the equavalent of generating smoothed "modulated" spatially normalised images.  The other does the equivalent of smoothing the modulated normalised fMRI/PET, and dividing by the smoothed Jacobian determinants.
Note that the behaviour of Dartel is different from that of more conventional methods -- particularly for voxels close to the edge of the original field of view.  Users may see streaky artifacts, but these are a feature - not a bug. They arise because when Dartel blurs the images, it normalises according to how many voxels are averaged over.  More conventional methods simply assume zeros outside the field of view, causing the signal to drop off to zero.

* **Dartel Template** (select files)  
Select the final Template file generated by Dartel. This will be affine registered with a TPM file, such that the resulting spatially normalised images are closer aligned to MNI space. Leave empty if you do not wish to incorporate a transform to MNI space (ie just click **done** on the file selector, without selecting any images).

* **Select according to** (choose an option)  
You may wish to spatially normalise only a few subjects, but have many scans per subject (eg for fMRI), or you may have lots of subjects, but with a small and fixed number of scans for each of them (eg for VBM).  The idea is to chose the way of selecting files that is easier.

    * **Few Subjects** (create a list of items)  
    Select this option if there are only a few subjects, each with many or a variable number of scans each. You will then need to specify a series of subjects, and the flow field and images of each of them.

        * **Subject**   
        Subject to be spatially normalized.

            * **Flow Field** (select files)  
            Dartel flow field for this subject.

            * **Images** (select files)  
            Images for this subject to spatially normalise.

    * **Many Subjects**   
    Select this option if you have many subjects to spatially normalise, but there are a small and fixed number of scans for each subject.

        * **Flow fields** (select files)  
        The flow fields store the deformation information. The same fields can be used for both forward or backward deformations (or even, in principle, half way or exaggerated deformations).

        * **Images** (create a list of items)  
        The flow field deformations can be applied to multiple images. At this point, you are choosing how many images each flow field should be applied to.

            * **Images** (select files)  
            Select images to be warped. Note that there should be the same number of images as there are flow fields, such that each flow field warps one image.

* **Voxel sizes** (enter text)  
Specify the voxel sizes of the deformation field to be produced. Non-finite values will default to the voxel sizes of the template imagethat was originally used to estimate the deformation.

* **Bounding box** (enter text)  
Specify the bounding box of the deformation field to be produced. Non-finite values will default to the bounding box of the template imagethat was originally used to estimate the deformation.

* **Preserve** (choose from the menu)  
    * **Preserve concentrations** (no "modulation"): Smoothed spatially normalised images (sw*) represent weighted averages of the signal under the smoothing kernel, approximately preserving the intensities of the original images. This option is currently suggested for eg fMRI.
    * **Preserve amount** ("modulation"): Smoothed and spatially normalised images preserve the total amount of signal from each region in the images (smw*). Areas that are expanded during warping are correspondingly reduced in intensity. This option is suggested for VBM.

* **Gaussian FWHM** (enter text)  
Specify the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the Gaussian blurring kernel in mm. Three values should be entered, denoting the FWHM in the x, y and z directions. Note that you can also specify [0 0 0], but any "modulated" data will show aliasing (see eg Wikipedia), which occurs because of the way the warped images are generated.
