# MEG/EEG analyis overview

## Overview

For the formal basis of these steps, see SPM publications, most
specifically [Henson et al. (2011)](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00076).


??? tip "Data acquisition"

    The MEG data consist of 102 magnetometers and 204 planar gradiometers
    from an Elekta VectorView system. These two sensor types are sensitive to different aspects of magnetic field changes generated by the brain but their analysis is mostly similar. Magnetometers are more sensitive to signals from deeper brain sources but they can also be noisier as they do not suppress distant interfering sources as well as gradiometers.
    
    The same system was used to simultaneously record EEG data from 70 electrodes (using a nose
    reference), which are stored in the same "FIF" format file. The version of the data you will work on have been "cleaned" using Signal-Space Separation (also known by its commercial name "MaxFilter"), a special method that can remove a lot of interference coming from outside the brain, hence the `_sss` suffix after the file name. A 3D digitiser was used to digitise three fiducial points and a
    large number of other points across the scalp, which can be used to
    coregister the M/EEG data with the structural MRI image. Six runs
    (sessions) of approximately 10mins were acquired for each subject, while
    they judged the left-right symmetry of each stimulus (face or
    scrambled), leading to nearly 300 trials in total for each of the 3
    conditions.


## Getting Started

Open SPM and ensure it is set to the EEG modality. To do this, type
`spm eeg` into the MATLAB command window. For this to work, SPM root
folder must be in your MATLAB path.

Later, when you run your own scripts, you can make sure that SPM is set to the EEG modality by adding the following line at the beginning of your script:

```matlab
spm('eeg');     
```



